[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
me
charlie state our headlines today
new year 2021 tribute to pay to the
heroes of the coronavirus pandemic
hospitals under extreme pressure as the
new year begins
rising covered cases mean some seriously
ill patients are being moved to
hospitals on the other side of the
country
a new era in the uk's relationship with
the european union as the brexit
transition period
officially ends and it's a cold start to
the new year minus six at the moment in
parts
of southwest england is there anything
warmer on horizon i'll have all your
forecast details here on breakfast
[Music]
good morning it's friday the 1st of
january happy new year
to you our top story this morning as
most people across the uk
seem to have heeded calls to stay at
home on new year's eve
some hospitals in london and the
southeast of england say they're now
under extreme pressure because of rising
coronavirus cases
they say some seriously ill patients are
being moved to intensive care units in
other parts of the country
our health correspondent catherine
decosta has this report
like several major hospitals in the
capital university college london's had
to rapidly increase critical care
capacity
to cope with a surge in covi patients
it's caring for more than 200 with
numbers
rising by the day staff can't always
provide one-to-one care
what we're having to now do is stretch
um those ratios
so uh one intensive care nurse is
finding themselves looking after two
three and some places at the peak they
were looking after
four four or five patients at a time and
that puts a phenomenal amount of stress
um on the team pressure ii
at south end hospital a shortage of
staff saw the trust declare a major
incident on wednesday
some patients have had to be transferred
to cambridge
another sign of the unprecedented
pressure hospitals are under
staff are already stretched they
themselves are suffering from the
effects of of covert 19 through
being ill themselves and being off work
or having to self-isolate because of
exposure
so there's a real risk of of health
services
becoming overwhelmed because of lack of
staff
and inadequate number of beds and the
pressure that
everyone is under at the moment so what
does declaring a major incident mean
government money to reopen mothballed
wards and community hospitals
people sent to other hospitals in the
region or further afield
and the fire brigade could drive
ambulances
that's something being considered in
buckinghamshire after the council and
hospital trust
also declared a major incident this week
we're trying to actually look at the
ways in which we can persuade people to
use other alternatives
other than coming into the hospital the
a e department
and also we're looking at ways in which
we can deploy resources
across from other departments such as
the council into the hospital
from the hospital's point of view as
well they're looking at cancelling some
of their
non-urgent operations to actually free
up resource for covert patients
some hospitals in the south east are now
so stretched
patients arriving at a e are being
treated in ambulances
others are having to be sent across
england for treatment
and some health leaders are warning
we've yet to see the impact of mixing
over christmas
what we're going to see in the coming
weeks is
these numbers really increasing because
we know that there is a real lag between
people being infected with covid and the
symptoms coming out so
typically it can be a two-week journey
from someone realizing that they've been
infected to perhaps being hospitalized
so the pressure is going to continue to
mount and it's going to be quite a
nail-biting journey for the nhs
it's a tough start to the new year for
many the rollout of vaccines can't come
soon enough
catherine de costa bbc news
the uk has completed its formal
separation
from the european union leaving the
single market and the customs union
brexit transition period expired at 11
o'clock last night when the new trade
deal came into effect
let's get more from our political
correspondent nick early
morning to you nick and happy new year
to you so
one of the phrases being used this
morning the new era
for the new year what's that going to
look and feel like
morning charlie happy new year to you
too and 2021
is the year that we're gonna start
seeing the actual impact of brexit
um there are some pretty big changes
that are coming
into effect today on how we travel to
europe you'll still be able to
go to europe visa free but only for 90
days there's going to be changes to the
way
we work in europe big changes for
businesses who trade with europe as well
a lot more paperwork for them to do
although it might be a few days before
we see
the impact of that just because there
isn't as much trade going on
over the new year period for boris
johnson
it's a big chance to take back control
this is him
fulfilling the promises he thinks he
made back in 2016 about sovereignty
talking this morning in the papers about
uh giving some of that control back in
the uk's destiny
now being in its own hands that said
don't assume we're going to stop
talking about this forever now because
there are still big elements of
our relationship with europe that need
to be worked out things like
how financial services trade with europe
data shared
the specifics of the relationship
between the uk gibraltar
and spain and remember that the free
trade agreement that is coming into
force
can change over time as well the uk has
the power to make different decisions
but that will have an impact so
a big change today but still big changes
to be sorted out too
thanks nick so focus on trade imports
travel
and let's go to dover our reporter simon
jones is there this morning a lot of
focus
of course on how this will work in
practice
at the ports for tourists as well as for
business
and trade uh give us a picture of what
it looks like simon
well in the past few minutes we've just
seen the first couple of ferries leave
dover heading towards france and these
are
the very first ferries to sail under
these
new arrangements from dover and the
first time lorry drivers are
experiencing them too
for them it means a degree of extra
paperwork
and bureaucracy so when they arrive at
the port they will have to have a
barcode they will have got that
by getting permissions for imports and
exports from the government that barcode
will be
scanned at them will be uploaded to
french customs and in theory
whilst lorry drivers are on the ferry
the french customs
will check all those details and then
once they arrive in france they'll be
able to drive off the ferry and continue
their journeys
if everything is in order if not they
may well be pulled over
for further checks for lorries coming in
the opposite direction from france to
dover
there will be just a light touch from
the british government for the first six
months
adding to this though anyone wanting to
travel from the uk to france
still has to have a negative coronavirus
test so
when you look at that and the new
bureaucracy then that's potentially when
there could be problems in the coming
days as people get used to this new
system
and also for passengers at the moment
essential travel is the only way you're
allowed to visit the eu but there will
be changes in terms of
passports in terms of how long you'll be
allowed to stay in the eu so a lot of
things
to get used to for a lot of people simon
thank you that's a look at the
situation in dover one of the key ports
of course let's have a look at northern
ireland now
where they will continue to follow many
of the eu's rules it's slightly
different there are island correspondent
chris page
is in belfast uh looks like a brother
beautiful morning there chris has to be
said in this
new year what are the changes going to
mean
well charlie as you said it's a very
still and crisp new year's morning here
at belfast
port and it's quite hard to imagine
really that this is the front line for a
significant shift in
northern ireland's economic relationship
with the rest of the uk but that is
how plenty of people see it for at the
first time there'll be lots of
new checks on goods arriving here from
england scotland and wales at least
40 lorries a day will be checked uh here
at belfast and at northern ireland's
other main port
lauren in county antrim the reason for
that northern ireland is in effect
staying in the european
single market for goods the special
arrangement negotiated
in order to avoid checkpoints on the
land border with the irish republic
which was
uh one of the most difficult issues
throughout the years
of the whole brexit process now what's
happening today isn't just important
practically for the likes of holiers
it's also important politically
the new arrangements really have little
if any political support here
unionists see this as a new trade border
in the irish cease
cutting off northern ireland from
britain
nationalists and cross community parties
will they oppose brexit altogether
what the government of london is
emphasizing though is that northern
ireland is in
a unique position it has basically full
access to both the british market
and the european market and there should
be big business opportunities from that
chris thanks very much happy new year to
you
we're going to have a look at some of
the uh celebrations took place last
night muted of course
because of the events the canceled scale
down due to the pandemic in london
a televised display was held over the
river thames meanwhile in scotland
crowds of people gathered at edinburgh
castle despite warnings to stay away
greg mckenzie has this report an
hour after leaving the eu behind the uk
left 2020 behind
these were fireworks but done in a
covered secure way
a dazzling display on the thames
televised on the bbc at midnight
over the o2 arena images filled the
skies
including a tribute to the nhs and to
captain sir tom
moore there is even a special mention to
something we've all had to get used to
zoom calls before tonight
police had warned people to stay away on
london's embankment
a few hundred people did gather
it's been very like quiet and there's
police everywhere so it's just like
it's not like the usual no the police
have been lovely it's been fine
it's been nice we went to the tate
britain earlier the lights are still up
people are jolly
celebrations all over the uk have been
either cancelled or
toned down at edinburgh castle
a single bagpiper welcomed in the new
year
while the majority stayed away some
people
were turned away by the police instead
of the usual fireworks for hogmanay
this was the replacement a series of
videos showing drones forming images
over scotland skies
[Music]
many of us may have seen in the new year
from our homes
as the pandemic continues to restrict
life in the uk
but with 2020 now at an end we'll be all
hoping
for a better 2021. greg mckenzie
bbc news let's have a look at some of
the celebrations elsewhere
around the world different of course
this was the firework display that went
ahead in sydney harbour
people weren't allowed to gather to
watch it though
and in auckland people could attend
because new zealand's strict lockdown
and border closures
have been so effective
and the pictures from new york as well
celebrations definitely cut back
in times square a small number of
people uh frontline workers and vips
gathered
usually of course it's packed with tens
of thousands
of people
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news